well gaza's health Ministry spokesman
provided this update on the situation at
the Indonesian
Hospital electromechanical Systems have
stopped working in all Hospital
departments including ventilation and
air conditioning systems in operating
rooms and intensive care units the only
oxygen station in the hospital has
stopped and we are now relying on the
available oxygen cylinders as an
alternative Source the electric power
supply has been cut out replacing it
with manual lighting mechanisms and
other available mechanisms refrigerators
for storing dead bodies have stopped
working well I'm joined on the phone now
by safwat Al calut he's in Gaza safwat
said just how bad is the situation now
at these hospitals I mean healthc care
services are collapsing right across
Gaza look the Ministry of Health they
said earlier that uh the the main
generator in uh the Indonesian Hospital
stopped and now they are working on uh a
small one just for lighting and small uh
or light uses including lighting and
ventilation uh they also added that tens
of medical centers uh and hospitals are
out of services all over the Gaza since
they are unreachable or even
destroyed during the Israeli War and
bombardment all over the G again so
mostly because of the intensified air
strike in the north and in Gaza City the
main two Hospital remaining there shifa
hospital and Indonesia are the most
affected hospitals in in the G strip the
uh the most significant appeal that they
launched yesterday it was besides uh
asking or looking for fuel to keep the
generators operating is the opening of
Rafa High Crossing the health system is
unable completely to deal with the
casualties the wounded people who have
been arriving arriving to the hospital
they are facing new and serious injuries
including Burns and cuts uh in different
parts of the body so we saw pictures of
uh of wounded people arriving to the
hospital with Burns and with cuts and
the this this medical the medical uh uh
system in Gaza is not prepared for such
a large number and different uh wounds
that they have been seeing since the
beginning of of the the war so yesterday
they sent 70 to Egypt uh but still this
this number is very limited in
comparison with the big number that
needs urgent evacuation to the to Egypt
safat and what's the latest then at the
jabalia refugee camp I mean many people
are still bu carried under the rubble
there yes again the minister of Health
says that after the two
uh massacr in jabalia which and one day
separated between the the first and the
second one they speak about 1,000
Palestinian between killed wounded and
missing under the under the reubel uh
many families I I am from jabalia my
family is still in jabalia and they told
me that many people are still digging
manually using simple machines uh they
hope to find uh the bodies it's not even
now there's they lost the hope to find
them alive but at least the bodies of
theirs under the rubble still this is
the case in in many places all over the
G strip the people are still especially
those who couldn't find their the bodies
of there still digging and go from every
every now and then to find and look for
parts of the bodies of theirs to
recognize uh to recognize them or to
bury them if they are lucky as they they
say all right safat alut they're live
for us in Gaza safwat thank you well the
Israeli Army is indiscriminate bombing
of Gaza has killed thousands of children
according to the Palestinian health
authority
3,650 have been killed over the last 25
days that means six children lose their
lives every hour that's one every 10
minutes among them are toddlers And
newborns well earlier I spoke to Dr
Sanaya senanayaka from the Australian
National University I asked him what the
impact will be for hospitals potentially
losing
power it's a very serious problem so as
you say it's good that they have a
backup generator but if you don't have
fuel to run that backup generator that
backup generator will stop working and
there are a number of consequences of
this first of all the most obvious ones
are people who are on life support life
saving machines such as artificial
ventilators those ventilators could stop
working now if this happens uh in a
situation where it may take an hour or
two hours to fix the problem then
artificial ventilation can be performed
on those patients but if it has to be
for 24 48 hours that becomes unrealistic
and those patients can't be ventilated
so and even if the generators come back
it may not start these ventil may not
start working immediately so all those
few minutes can be the difference
between life and death also just simple
things so patients in a bed on a ward
will often have a little buzzer where
they can call the nurse now it might be
for something very simple like they need
a paracetamol tablet for a bit of a
headache but they could be uh feeling uh
very sick having a gastrointestinal
bleed or about to collapse or faint and
those can be missed yeah and many of
these hospitals San in Gaza serve a dual
function don't they I mean not only do
they provide levels of critical care as
you've just described but they also
provide shelter for thousands of
displace Palestinians from the Israeli
bombardment no no exactly and uh once
those places places can't be used where
do these people go so it's terrible and
of course the the other thing as well uh
going back to what we first talked about
with generators not working fridges
where medications and vaccines are
stored may stop working and in a war
zone where people are getting serious
cuts and lacerations if the tetanus
vaccines aren't up to date they don't
get a tetanus shot they could get
tetanus and in this day and age Daren
you don't want to see anyone getting
tetanus